PMID:10591675  Overexpression of apolipoprotein E3 in transgenic rabbits causes combined hyperlipidemia by stimulating hepatic VLDL production and impairing VLDL lipolysis.  (Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology, 1999)

The differential effects of overexpression of human apolipoprotein (apo) E3 on plasma cholesterol and triglyceride metabolism were investigated in transgenic rabbits expressing low (<10 mg/dL), medium (10 to 20 mg/dL), or high (>20 mg/dL) levels of apoE3. Cholesterol levels increased progressively with increasing levels of apoE3, whereas triglyceride levels were not significantly affected at apoE3 levels up to 20 mg/dL but were markedly increased at levels of apoE3 >20 mg/dL. The medium expressers had marked hypercholesterolemia (up to 3- to 4-fold over nontransgenics), characterized by an increase in low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, while the low expressers had only slightly increased plasma cholesterol levels. The medium expressers displayed an 18-fold increase in LDL but also had a 2-fold increase in hepatic very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) triglyceride production, an 8-fold increase in VLDL apoB, and a moderate decrease in the ability of the VLDL to be lipolyzed. However, plasma clearance of VLDL was increased, likely because of the increased apoE3 content. The increase in LDL appears to be due to an enhanced competition of VLDL for LDL receptor binding and uptake, resulting in the accumulation of LDL. The combined hyperlipidemia of the apoE3 high expressers (>20 mg/dL) was characterized by a 19-fold increase in LDL cholesterol but also a 4-fold increase in hepatic VLDL triglyceride production associated with a marked elevation of plasma VLDL triglycerides, cholesterol, and apoB100 (4-, 9-, and 25-fold over nontransgenics, respectively). The VLDL from the high expressers was much more enriched in apoE3 and markedly depleted in apoC-II, which contributed to a >60% inhibition of VLDL lipolysis. The combined effects of stimulated VLDL production and impaired VLDL lipolysis accounted for the increases in plasma triglyceride and VLDL concentrations in the apoE3 high expressers. The hyperlipidemic apoE3 rabbits have phenotypes similar to those of familial combined hyperlipidemia, in which VLDL overproduction is a major biochemical feature. Overall, elevated expression of apoE3 appears to determine plasma lipid levels by stimulating hepatic VLDL production, enhancing VLDL clearance, and inhibiting VLDL lipolysis. Thus, the differential expression of apoE may, within a rather narrow range of concentrations, play a critical role in modulating plasma cholesterol and triglyceride levels and may represent an important determinant of specific types of hyperlipoproteinemia.