PMID:10878284  Immunosuppressive drugs: the first 50 years and a glance forward.  (Immunopharmacology, 2000)

During the past 50 years, many immunosuppressive drugs have been described. Often their mechanisms of action were established long after their discovery. Eventually these mechanisms were found to fall into five groups: (i) regulators of gene expression; (ii) alkylating agents; (iii) inhibitors of de novo purine synthesis; (iv) inhibitors of de novo pyrimidine synthesis; and (v) inhibitors of kinases and phosphatases. Glucocorticoids exert immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory activity mainly by inhibiting the expression of genes for interleukin-2 and other mediators. Cyclophosphamide metabolites alkylate DNA bases and preferentially suppress immune responses mediated by B-lymphocytes. Methotrexate and its polyglutamate derivatives suppress inflammatory responses through release of adenosine; they suppress immune responses by inducing the apoptosis of activated T-lymphocytes and inhibiting the synthesis of both purines and pyrimidines. Azathioprine metabolites inhibit several enzymes of purine synthesis. Mycophenolic acid and mizoribine inhibit inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase, thereby depleting guanosine nucleotides. Mycophenolic acid induces apoptosis of activated T-lymphocytes. A leflunomide metabolite and Brequinar inhibit dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, thereby suppressing pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis. Cyclosporine and FK-506 (Tacrolimus) inhibit the phosphatase activity of calcineurin, thereby suppressing the production of IL-2 and other cytokines. In addition, these compounds have recently been found to block the JNK and p38 signaling pathways triggered by antigen recognition in T-cells. In contrast, rapamycin inhibits kinases required for cell cycling and responses to IL-2. Rapamycin also induces apoptosis of activated T-lymphocytes. Immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory compounds in development include inhibitors of p38 kinase and of the type IV isoform of cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase which is expressed in lymphocytes and monocytes.A promising future application of immunosuppressive drugs is their use in a regime to induce tolerance to allografts. The role of leukocytes in grafts, and the induction of apoptosis of clones of responding T-lymphocytes, is discussed.