PMID:39009935  The BCR::ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitors ponatinib and nilotinib differentially affect endothelial angiogenesis and signalling.  (Molecular and cellular biochemistry, 2025)

BCR::ABL1 inhibitors, the treatment of choice for the majority of patients with chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML), can cause vascular side effects that vary between agents. The exact underlying mechanisms are still poorly understood, but the vascular endothelium has been proposed as a site of origin. The present study investigates the effects of three BCR::ABL1 inhibitors, ponatinib, nilotinib and imatinib, on angiogenesis and signalling in human endothelial cells in response to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). The experiments were performed in endothelial cells isolated from human umbilical veins. After exposure to imatinib, ponatinib and nilotinib, the angiogenic capacity of endothelial cells was assessed in spheroid assays. VEGF-induced signalling pathways were examined in Western blotting experiments using different specific antibodies. RNAi technology was used to downregulate proteins of interest. Intracellular cGMP levels were measured by ELISA. Imatinib had no effect on endothelial function. Ponatinib inhibited VEGF-induced sprouting, while nilotinib increased spontaneous and VEGF-stimulated angiogenesis. These effects did not involve wild-type ABL1 or ABL2, as siRNA-mediated knockdown of these kinases did not affect angiogenesis and VEGF signalling. Consistent with their effects on sprouting, ponatinib and nilotinib affected angiogenic pathways in opposite directions. While ponatinib inhibited VEGF-induced signalling and cGMP formation, nilotinib activated angiogenic signalling, in particular phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (Erk1/2). The latter occurred in an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-dependent manner possibly via suppressing Fyn-related kinase (FRK), a negative regulator of EGFR signalling. Both, pharmacological inhibition of Erk1/2 or EGFR suppressed nilotinib-induced angiogenic sprouting. These results support the notion that the vascular endothelium is a site of action of BCR::ABL1 inhibitors from which side effects may arise, and that the different vascular toxicity profiles of BCR::ABL1 inhibitors may be due to their different actions at the molecular level. In addition, the as yet unknown pro-angiogenic effect of nilotinib should be considered in the treatment of patients with comorbidities associated with pathological angiogenesis, such as ocular disease, arthritis or obesity.