PMID:34907000  Senolytic-Mediated Elimination of Head and Neck Tumor Cells Induced Into Senescence by Cisplatin.  (Molecular pharmacology, 2022)

Therapeutic outcomes achieved in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients by concurrent cisplatin-based chemoradiotherapy initially reflect both tumor regression and tumor stasis. However, local and distant metastasis and disease relapse are common in HNSCC patients. In the current work, we demonstrate that cisplatin treatment induces senescence in both p53 wild-type HN30 and p53 mutant HN12 head and neck cancer models. We also show that tumor cells can escape from senescence both in vitro and in vivo. We further establish the effectiveness of the senolytic, ABT-263 (Navitoclax), in elimination of senescent tumor cells after cisplatin treatment. Navitoclax increased apoptosis by 3.3-fold (P ≤ 0.05) at day 7 compared with monotherapy by cisplatin. Additionally, we show that ABT-263 interferes with the interaction between B-cell lymphoma-x large (BCL-XL) and BAX, anti- and pro-apoptotic proteins, respectively, followed by BAX activation, suggesting that ABT-263-induced apoptotic cell death is mediated through BAX. Our in vivo studies also confirm senescence induction in tumor cells by cisplatin, and the promotion of apoptosis coupled with a significant delay of tumor growth after sequential treatment with ABT-263. Sequential treatment with cisplatin followed by ABT-263 extended the humane endpoint to ∼130 days compared with cisplatin alone, where mice survived ∼75 days. These results support the premise that senolytic agents could be used to eliminate residual senescent tumor cells after chemotherapy and thereby potentially delay disease recurrence in head and neck cancer patients. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Disease recurrence is the most common cause of death in head and neck cancer patients. B-cell lymphoma-x large inhibitors such as ABT-263 (Navitoclax) have the capacity to be used in combination with cisplatin in head and neck cancer patients to eliminate senescent cells and possibly prevent disease relapse.