PMID:28459216  Abrus agglutinin targets cancer stem-like cells by eliminating self-renewal capacity accompanied with apoptosis in oral squamous cell carcinoma.  (Tumour biology : the journal of the International Society for Oncodevelopmental Biology and Medicine, 2017)

The accumulating evidences show that Abrus agglutinin, a plant lectin, displays a broad range of anticancer activity including cancer-specific induction of apoptosis; however, the underlying molecular mechanism of Abrus agglutinin-induced oral cancer stem cell elimination remains elusive. Our data documented that Abrus agglutinin effectively downregulated the CD44+ expression with the increased CD44- population in different oral cancer cells. After 24-h Abrus agglutinin treatment, FaDu cells were quantified for orosphere formation in ultra-low attachment plates and data showed that Abrus agglutinin inhibited the number and size of orosphere in a dose-dependent manner in FaDu cells. Furthermore, Abrus agglutinin hindered the plasticity of FaDu orospheres as supported by reduced sphere formation and downregulated the self-renewal property via inhibition of Wnt-β-catenin signaling pathway. Introduction of LiCl, a glycogen synthase kinase 3β inhibitor, rescued the Abrus agglutinin-stimulated inhibition of β-catenin and phosphorylated glycogen synthase kinase 3β in FaDu cell-derived orospheres confirming importance of Wnt signaling in Abrus agglutinin-mediated inhibition of stemness. In this connection, our data showed that Abrus agglutinin restrained proliferation and induced apoptosis in FaDu-derived cancer stem cells in dose-dependent manner. Moreover, western blot data demonstrated that Abrus agglutinin increased the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio with activation of poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase and caspase-3 favoring apoptosis induction in orospheres. Abrus agglutinin induced reactive oxygen species accumulation in orospheres and pretreatment of N-acetyl cysteine, and a reactive oxygen species scavenger inhibited Abrus agglutinin-mediated caspase-3 activity and β-catenin expression indicating reactive oxygen species as a principal regulator of Wnt signaling and apoptosis. In conclusion, Abrus agglutinin has a potential role as an integrative therapeutic approach for combating oral cancer through targeting self-renewability of orospheres via reactive oxygen species-mediated apoptosis.