PMID:35974187  Fenretinide combines perturbation of signaling kinases, cell-extracellular matrix interactions and matrix metalloproteinase activation to inhibit invasion in oral squamous cell carcinoma cells.  (Carcinogenesis, 2022)

Basement membrane invasion defines malignant transformation of surface premalignancy. Treatment of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells with the synthetic vitamin A derivative, fenretinide (4HPR), induces numerous cancer-preventive effects including suppression of basement membrane invasion, elimination of anchorage-independent growth, disruption of actin cytoskeletal components and inhibition of the invasion-enabling focal adhesive kinase. The purpose of this study was to elucidate 4HPR's effects on additional invasion-relevant mechanisms including matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activation and function, cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) attachments and interaction with a kinase that is essential for the epithelial-myoepithelial transformation i.e. c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK). Our data revealed that 4HPR binds with high affinity to the ATP-binding site of all three JNK isoforms with concurrent suppression of kinase function. Additional studies showed 4HPR treatment inhibited both OSCC cell-ECM adhesion and MMP activation and function. JNK downregulation and induced expression studies confirmed that the JNK3 isoform conveyed that largest impact on OSCC migration and invasion. Biodegradable polymeric implants formulated to preserve 4HPR's function and bioavailability were employed to assess 4HPR's chemopreventive impact on an OSCC tumor induction model. These studies revealed 4HPR local delivery significantly inhibited OSCC tumor size, mitotic indices and expression of the endothelial marker, erythroblast transformation-specific-related gene with concurrent increases in tumor apoptosis (cleaved caspase-3). Collectively, these data show that 4HPR suppresses invasion at multiple sites including 'outside-in' signaling, cell-ECM interactions and suppression of MMPs. These functions are also essential for physiologic function. Regulation is therefore essential and reinforces the pharmacologic advantage of local delivery chemopreventive formulations. .